masterclass: Initial PR for debugging masterclass (#1)
balena-io/debugging-masterclass: README.md

Balena Device Debugging Masterclass
===================================

> **Masterclass Type:** Core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ **Masterclass Type:** Core
```

Author: Done.

> **Maximum Expected Time To Complete: 3 hours**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ **Maximum Expected Time To Complete:** 3 hours
```

Author: Done.

# Prerequisite Classes

This masterclass builds upon knowledge that has been taught in previous classes.
To gain the most from this masterclass, we recommend that you first undertake
the following masterclasses:

> * [balena CLI Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io-projects/balena-cli-masterclass)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [balena CLI Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/balena-cli-masterclass)
```

Author: Done.

> * [balenaOS Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io-projects/balenaos-masterclass/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [balenaOS Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/balenaos-masterclass/)
```

Author: Done.

> * [balena Networking Masterclass]() *NOT YET AVAILABLE*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [balena Networking Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/networking-masterclass/) *NOT YET AVAILABLE*
```

Reviewer: Even though it's not "published", might as well leave the permalink, no?

Author: Yep, added!

# Introduction

> At balena, we believe the best way to support a customer is via the engineers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At balena, we believe the best people to support a customer are the engineers who build the product
```

Author: Done

who build the product. They have the depth and breadth of knowledge that can
quickly identify and track down issues that traditional support agents usually
do not. Not only does this help a customer quickly and efficiently solve most
issues, but it also immerses balena engineers in sections of the product they
might not otherwise encounter in their usual working life, which further
improves the support each engineer can offer. This masterclass has been written
as an initial guide for new engineers about to start support duties.

Whilst the majority of devices never see an issue, occasionally a customer will
contact balena support with a query where one of their devices is exhibiting

> anomalous behaviour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
anomalous behavior.
```

Author: Done.

problems. In compiling this document, a group of highly seasoned balena
engineers discussed their techniques for discovering and resolving on-device
issues, as well as techniques for determining how best to mitigate an issue
being exhibited.

In this masterclass, you will learn how to:

* Gain access to a customer device, when permission has been granted
* Retrieve initial diagnostics for the device
* Identify and solve common networking problems
* Work with the Supervisor
* Work with balenaEngine
* Examine the Kernel logs
* Understand media-based issues (such as SD card corruption)

**Note:** Whilst this masterclass is intended for new engineers about to start
    support duties at balena, it is also intended to act as an item of interest
    to customers who wish to know more about how we initially go about debugging
    a device (and includes information that customers themselves could use
    to give a support agent more information). We recommend, however, ensuring
    balena support is *always* contacted should you have an issue with a device
    that is not working correctly.

# Hardware and Software Requirements

It is assumed that the reader has access to the following:

> * A locally cloned copy of this repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A local copy of this repository
```

Author: Done.

        * Download ZIP file (from 'Clone or download'->'Download ZIP') and then
                unzip it to a suitable directory
* A balena supported device, such as a [balenaFin 1.1](https://store.balena.io/collections/developer-kit/products/balenafin-v1-1-0-developer-kit),
        [Raspberry Pi 3](https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-b/)
        or [Intel NUC](https://www.intel.co.uk/content/www/uk/en/products/boards-kits/nuc.html). If you don't have a device, you can emulate an Intel NUC by
        installing VirtualBox and following [this guide](https://www.balena.io/blog/no-hardware-use-virtualbox/)
* A suitable shell environment for command execution (such as `bash`)
* A [balenaCloud](https://www.balena.io/) account
* A familiarity with [Dockerfiles](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/)
* An installed instance of the [balena CLI](https://github.com/balena-io/balena-cli/)

# Exercises

The following exercises assume access to a device that has been provisioned.
As per the other masterclasses in this series we're going to assume that's a
balenaFin, however you can simply alter the device type as appropriate in the

> following instructions. The balena CLI is going to be used over the WebTerminal

Reviewer 2: This is a confusing sentence, are we using the webterminal or the CLI, or are we using the webterminal to run the CLI?

Author: It really is, I'd meant 'over' here as instead, but it scanned very badly. Fixed!

in the balenaCloud Dashboard for accessing the device, but all of the exercises

> could be completed via this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could be completed in this manner.
```

Author: Done.

First login to your balena account via `balena login`, and then create a new
application:
```
$ balena app create --type fincm3 DebugApp
Application created: DebugApp (fincm3, id 1544229)
```

> Now provision a device, either by downloading a *debug* image from the Dashboard,

Reviewer 2: AFAIK the phrase `debug image` is not used in our documentation. I suggest using `development image`, as that is how it is labelled in the balena cloud dashboard
```suggestion
Now provision a device, either by downloading a *development* image from the Dashboard,
```

Author: Done.

or by flashing via the command line (note that currently, balenaEtcher must
be running to enable discovery of the balenaFin from balena CLI):
```
$ balena os download fincm3 --version 2.44.0+rev1.dev --output balena-debug.img
Getting device operating system for fincm3
The image was downloaded successfully
```
Carry out any configuration generation required, should you be using a Wifi
AP and inject the configuration into the image (see
[balena CLI Advanced Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io-projects/balena-cli-advanced-masterclass#32-configuring-a-provisioning-image)

> for more details), or quickly use an ethernet configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for more details), or use an ethernet connection:
```

Author: Done.

```
$ balena os configure balena-debug.img --app DebugApp --config-network=ethernet
Configuring operating system image
$ balena util available-drives
DEVICE     SIZE      DESCRIPTION
/dev/disk4 63.6 GB   Compute Module
$ balena os initialize balena-debug.img --type fincm3 --drive /dev/disk4 --yes
Initializing device

Note: Initializing the device may ask for administrative permissions

> because we need to access the raw devices directly.

Reviewer 2: The phrase `raw devices` is confusing here, perhaps it is unnecessary detail?

Author: Maybe, I'll leave it to you to raise an issue on balena CLI if required.

Going to erase /dev/disk4.
Admin privileges required: you may be asked for your computer password to continue.
Writing Device OS [========================] 100% eta 0s
Validating Device OS [========================] 100% eta 0s
You can safely remove /dev/disk4 now
```
You should now have a device that will appear as part of the DebugApp fleet:
```
$ balena devices | grep DebugApp
1744728 7db55ce black-mountain    fincm3       DebugApp         Idle   true      10.3.7             balenaOS 2.44.0+rev1 https://dashboard.balena-cloud.com/devices/7db55ce99e9c135dbc69974a7abbe511/summary
```
For convenience, export a variable to point to the root of this masterclass
repository, as we'll use this for the rest of the exercises, eg:
```
$ export BALENA_DEBUGGING_MASTERCLASS=~/debugging-masterclass
```
Finally, push the code in the `multicontainer-app` directory to the application:
```
$ cd $BALENA_DEBUGGING_MASTERCLASS/multicontainer-app
$ balena push DebugApp
```

## 1. Accessing a User Device

> Any device owned by a customer automatically allows access by that user via

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any device owned by a customer automatically allows access by that user from the WebTerminal
(in the device's Dashboard page), or using the balena CLI with `balena ssh <uuid>`.
```

Author: Not sure I agree, via is a good shortening of 'from the' though I have improved the CLI text that follows on.

either the WebTerminal (in the device's Dashboard page), or via the balena CLI
via `balena ssh <uuid>`. However, for a support agent to gain access to a device
that isn't owned by them, a user or collaborator that does have access must
grant it explicitly.

### 1.1 Granting Support Access to a Support Agent

> A user can grant access for a device to a support agent by selecting the device

Reviewer 2: We can rely on the surrounding context to reduce the verbosity of this sentence
```suggestion
A user can grant access to support agents by selecting the device from Dashboard
```

Author: Done.

they wish to grant access to from the Dashboard, and then selecting the
'Actions' tab in the left-hand sidepanel. Scrolling down the Actions page will
show a list of actions, with the 'Grant Support Access' option being the one
required here. A user can select this, then detemine the amount of time that
support agents are allowed access for. Once support has been granted, the
Dashboard will look something like this:
![Granted Support Access](resources/black-mountain-granted.png)

**Note:** It's also possible for a user to grant support for an entire
application by selecting the application's Dashboard page and going through
the same process (selecting 'Actions' and then 'Grant Support Access'). Granting
access to an application automatically grants access to all of its associated
devices.

Once support access has been granted, an agent will be able to use the UUID of
a device to gain access to it, using a URL of the form:

> https://dashboard.balena-cloud.com/devices/<deviceUUID>/summary

Reviewer 3: I think we need to escape the `<` because it renders in markdown as `.../devices//summary`

Author: Good spot, done.

The Dashboard will function in almost exactly in the same way as it would were
the device owned by the support agent viewing it. They may view logs and
use the WebTerminal to access either the Host balenaOS or any service currently
running.

They may also use balena CLI to SSH into either the balenaOS host or any service
using `balena ssh <uuid> [serviceName]`.

### 1.2 Access Restrictions

There are limits on what a support agent may do with a device they have
been granted access to. This includes the alteration of service and environment
variables and configurations (both application and device).

> Whilst this sounds like a limitation, it in fact ensures that a device being

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whilst this sounds like a limitation, it ensures that a device being
```

Author: Done.

> investigated for an issue cannot be unduly altered or modified. Support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
investigated for an issue cannot be unnecessarily altered or modified. Support
```

Author: Done.

investigations are intended as an avenue of exploration and research for

> ensuring that issues are categorised to allow improvements to the product

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensuring that issues are categorized to allow improvements to the product
```

Author: Done.

> surface such that these issues are eliminated.

Reviewer 2: This whole sentence feels out of place here. I feel like this should be in the introduction where the approach of using engineers for support is mentioned, as it nicely describes our goals when doing support. This sentence should probably be refactored to support the previous sentence, explaining how the intention is to explore and research rather than make config changes (which I think is the intention??)

Author: I'd actually like to keep this here. It reinforces the idea about why we're accessing the device in the appropriate section, rather than in the introduction which may have been forgotten about by this point. It's also echoing the reason for this section.

## 2. Initial Diagnosis

> The balenaCloud Dashboard includes the ability to run a set of diagnostics on

Reviewer: maybe there's bloggable content here along with https://github.com/balena-io/device-diagnostics/issues/163?

Author: Yeah, I definitely think so. Maybe you (and I if you want a hand?) should write something. cc @shaunmulligan @chrisys @garethtdavies

> a device, to determine its current condition. This should, in most cases,

Reviewer 2: I think we can be more active in this sentence

```suggestion
a device, to determine its current condition.  This should be the first step in attempting
to diagnose an issue before accessing the device via SSH.
```

Author: I'd put the caveat at in because there are some cases where trying to run the diagnostics is a *really* bad idea. If we have a know slow access (either due to media or because of flaky SSH connections) this can really cripple the device to the point of not then being able to SSH in to try a diagnosis. I mention this further on in the masterclass.

be the first step in attempting to diagnose an issue without having to
actually access the device via SSH. Ensuring diagnostics and health checks

> are examined first ensures that a support agent has a good idea of the type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are examined first ensures that a support agent has a good idea of the state a device is in...
```

Author: Done.

of situation a device is in before SSHing into it, as well as ensuring that
the information can be accessed later if required (should a device be in a
catastrophic state). This helps greatly in a support post-mortem should one
be required.

Currently, diagnosis is only available via the Dashboard.

> Let's take a look at the device provisioned earlier that is should now be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at the device provisioned earlier that should now be
```

Author: Done.

running the code pushed to the DebugApp. Bring up the balenaCloud Dashboard
page and select 'Diagnostics (Experimental)' from the left-hand panel.

Diagnostics are split into three separate sections: health checks, diagnostics
and Supervisor state.

### 2.1 Device Health Checks

> Select the 'Device Health Checks' tab in the Diagnostics page, and then 'Run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select the 'Device Health Checks' tab in the Diagnostics page, and then click 'Run
```

Author: Done.

> checks'. A set of health checks will be quickly carried out on-device, and you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
checks'. A set of health checks will be run on the device, and you
```

Author: Done.

should see the following conditions:

| Check | Status | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | check_balenaOS | Succeededsupported | balenaOS 2.x detected |

Reviewer 4: succeeded/supported?

Author: Fixed.

| check_under_voltage | Succeeded | No under-voltage events detected |
| check_memory | Succeeded | 75% memory available |
| check_container_engine | Succeeded | Container engine balena is running and has not restarted uncleanly
| check_supervisor | Succeeded | Supervisor is running |
| check_dns | Succeeded | First DNS server is 127.0.0.2 |

> | check_diskspace | Succeeded | df reports 99% free |

Reviewer 4: 99% is free disk space?

Author: Yep!

| check_write_latency | Succeeded | No slow disk writes detected |
| check_service_restarts | Succeeded | No services are restarting unexpectedly |
| check_timesync | Succeeded | Time is synchronized |

This shows a healthy device, where there are no obvious faults. That's no fun,
let's create one!

SSH into your device, via `balena ssh`, using the appropriate UUID. We want to
SSH into the host OS, as that's where we'll wreak havoc:
```
$ balena ssh 7db55ce99e9c135dbc69974a7abbe511
=============================================================
    Welcome to balenaOS
=============================================================
root@7db55ce:~#
```
We're going to do a couple of things that will show up as problems. Something

> you'll often check, and that we'll discuss later, is the state of the balena

Reviewer 2: Can this sentence be broken up into short intros for balenaEngine and supervisor, perhaps with links, instead of putting the explanations in parentheses?

Author: Done. And I do already include this in those sections, so this is definitely good to cut.

> Supervisor (which is responsible for the download, configuration, initialisation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supervisor (which is responsible for the download, configuration, initialization
```

Author: Done. How come it's not Supervizor, eh? :)

and startup of applications and their services) and balenaEngine (which is a

> highly customised fork of Docker that actually handles the images, containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
highly customized fork of Docker that actually handles the images, containers
```

Author: Done.

and volumes of an application's service).

First of all, we're going to kill the balenaEngine maliciously without letting

> it shut down properly by finding its PID:

Reviewer 2: The mention of PID is unnecessary here I think
```suggestion
it shut down correctly.
```

Author: Done.

```
root@7db55ce:~# ps | awk '!/awk/ && /balenad/ {print $1}' | xargs kill -9
```
What this does is list the processes running, looks for the `balenad` executable
(the balenaEngine itself) and then stop the engine with a `SIGKILL` signal,

> which won't let it clean up in a tidy fashion but make it immediately terminate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which will make it immediately terminate instead of shutting down correctly.
```

Author: Done.

In fact, we'll do it twice. Once you've waited about 30 seconds, run the command
again.

> Now we'll look at the health checks again. Hit 'Run checks' again in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we'll look at the health checks again. Click 'Run checks' again in the
```

Author: Done.

> Dashboard. After a few seconds, you'll now see the 'check_container_engine`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dashboard. After a few seconds, you'll see that the 'check_container_engine`
```

Author: Done.

section has changed:

> | Check | Status | Notes |

Reviewer 3: This doesn't seem to render on github correctly, but perhaps on docs it does?

Author: Think this is because I didn't leave a newline between the previous paragraph and the table. Have added a NL and will check when repushed.

| --- | --- | --- |
| check_container_engine | Failed |Container engine balena is up, but has 2 unclean restarts and may be crashlooping (most recent start time: Thu 2019-11-14 17:38:24 UTC) |

Unclean restarts usually mean that the engine crashed abnormally with an issue.
This usually happens when something catastrophic occurs between the Supervisor
and balenaEngine or corruption occurs in the image/container/volume store.
Let's take a look at the journal for balenaEngine (`balena.service`) on the
device:
```

> root@7db55ce:~# journalctl --no-pager -n 400 -u balena.service

Reviewer 3: I think @robertgzr has a nice ENV var that you can set to only see the logs of the balena service. I can't remember it off hand though :/

Reviewer 5: `SYSLOG_INDENTIFIER=balenad` but I learned that this is also accessible via a journalctl flag: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/journalctl.html#-t

`journalctl -u balena.service -t balenad` would only show logs from the engine

Author: This is great, thanks @robertgzr for the input, I've added a small section to specify this for balenad only :)

```
You'll see a *lot* of output, as the logs don't just show the balenaEngine
output but the output from the Supervisor as well. However, if you search

> through the output, you'll fine a couple of lines like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through the output, you'll find a couple of lines like the following:
```

Reviewer 2: I think `a couple of` can be a confusing term for non-native english speakers
```suggestion
through the output, you'll find some lines like the following:
```

Author: Done, though have replaced with 'several' which has a specific meaning.

```
Nov 15 10:33:04 7db55ce 36025a63fdf2[779]: [api]     GET /v1/healthy 200 - 12.070 ms
Nov 15 10:35:17 7db55ce systemd[1]: balena.service: Main process exited, code=killed, status=9/KILL
Nov 15 10:35:17 7db55ce systemd[1]: balena.service: Failed with result 'signal'.
Nov 15 10:35:18 7db55ce balenad[2873]: time="2019-11-15T10:35:18.148843059Z" level=warning msg="Running experimental build"
Nov 15 10:35:18 7db55ce balenad[2873]: time="2019-11-15T10:35:18.157035456Z" level=info msg="libcontainerd: started new balena-engine-containerd process" pid=2891
```

> As you can see, the `balena.service` was killed via a `SIGKILL` instruction. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see, the `balena.service` was killed with a `SIGKILL` instruction. The
```

Author: Done.

next lines show the service restarting, as the service is configured to restart
whenever it exits. If you continue searching, you'll see another similar set
of logs where we killed it a second time.

> You might also notice some lines such as the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might also notice some lines like this:
```

Author: Done.

```
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]: [1B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]: [36B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]: [16B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]: [1B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]: [1B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]: [35B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]: [16B blob data]
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]: [1B blob data]
```

> This `blob data` are in fact logs from running service containers that are not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This `blob data` is in fact logs from running service containers that are not
```

Author: Done.

the Supervisor (as the Supervisor is always logged in the clear). You can
read this data by using the `-a` switch when viewing the logs for balenaEngine:
```
root@7db55ce:~# journalctl --no-pager -a -n 400 -u balena
...
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]:
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]: > frontend@1.0.0 start /usr/src/app
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]: > node index.js
Nov 15 10:35:27 7db55ce ecb3a4b3a079[2873]:
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]:
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]: > backend@1.0.0 start /usr/src/app
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]: > node index.js
Nov 15 10:35:28 7db55ce 8794d382f463[2873]:
```
As you can see, this have now been specifically output for the two running
service containers.

> We'll go more into balenaEngine/Supervisor crashes and restarts later in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll discuss balenaEngine/Supervisor crashes and restarts in more detail later in the
```

Author: Done.

masterclass.

> There are many other health checks that can immediately show up an issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many other health checks that can immediately expose a problem
```

Author: Done.

> For example, warnings on low free memory or disk space can show up issues which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, warnings on low free memory or disk space can expose problems which
```

Author: Done.

> will exhibit themselves as application updates failling to download, or service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will exhibit themselves as application updates failing to download, or service
```

containers restarting abnormally (especially if an application service runs
unchecked and consumes memory until none if left). We'll also go through some
of these scenarios later.

### 2.2 Device Diagnostics

> Move to the 'Device Diagnostics' tab on the 'Diagnostics' page and hit the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Move to the 'Device Diagnostics' tab on the 'Diagnostics' page and click the
```

Author: Done.

'Run diagnostics' button.

Device diagnostics can be considered a more detailed snapshot of a running

> system as opposed to the healthchecks, which given the current status of a few

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
system as opposed to the healthchecks, which only give the current status of a few
```

Author: Done.

of the core components of the OS.

Once the diagnostic run has completed, you'll see a lot of logs from commands
that have been run. The section `--- COMMANDS ---` shows a list of all of the

> commands that are run to produce the diagnostics report. These commands cover

Reviewer: related: https://github.com/balena-io/device-diagnostics/issues/116

a wide range of functionality, but are comprised of 5 main areas:
* BALENA - The balenaEngine and latest journals
* HARDWARE - All aspects of HW, including CPU, memory and device tree info
    as well as statistics on device nodes, USB devices and disk space
* NETWORK - Covering everything from the current interface configurations
    to test pings/curls of remote hosts, the state of DNSmasq, OpenVPN and
    the current iptables configuration
* OS - This includes the current device configuration, the kernel log,
    the boot journal and the state of any HUP that may have been attempted
* SUPERVISOR - The current state and logs for the Supervisor
* TIME - The current date, state of the time and uptime for the device

> Examination of these sections can usually be useful to determine if something

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examination of this output will help to determine if something is not working correctly
```

is awry. Whilst we won't go into this here, the following exercises will all
deal with issues where the diagnostics will show abnormalities when examined.

### 2.3 Supervisor State

> Now move to the 'Supervisor State' tab on the 'Diagnostics' page and select

Reviewer 2: Moving to the `Supervisor State` tab and selecting it are the same thing, as unlike the other tabs there isn't a secondary button that needs to be clicked.
```suggestion
Now click the 'Supervisor State' tab on the 'Diagnostics' page.
```

Author: Done.

'Supervisor State'.

This does not require execution, and immediately queries the Supervisor to

> determine its current configuration. This includes two panels:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
determine its current configuration. This output is shown in two panels:
```

Author: Done.

> * Current Supervisor State - This is the current status of the Supervisor,

Reviewer 3: Might be worth mentioning that this only works if the VPN is enabled. Or perhaps worth mentioning that up front saying lots of the diagnostics and debug stuff assumes VPN is enabled.

Author: Done.

    including the address and port it can be reached on, the versions pertaining
    to it and the current application status
* Target Supervisor State - This is the target state for the Supervisor, based
    upon the release of the application the device is associated with (usually
    this is the latest application release, unless otherwise pinned). This
    includes all of the services, and any configuration set for each service,
    for the application, as well as configuration (such as boot and device tree
    settings)

> The Supervisor state should always be available, and should it not be, this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Supervisor state should always be available, and if it isn't

Author: Done.

is an initial indication that something is wrong (including the Supervisor
itself failing to run).

The Current State is useful for ensuring that versions of the Supervisor/OS
and access to the API is as-expected (or has been changed, should access
be required).

The Target State is extremely useful for ensuring that a release is running
correctly upon a device (as the `docker-compose` manifest for the release
can be read from the application's 'Release' page in the Dashboard), as well
as ensuring it's the commit that's expected.

> ## 3. Device Access and Responsibilities

Reviewer 2: I suggest splitting the "responsibilities" and "device via gateway" topics into seperate sections, as its unclear how the two are related here

Author: Good idea, done.

> Accessing a customer's device brings with it a set of responsibilities, both

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When accessing a customer's device you have a number of responsibilities, both
```

Author: Done.

> technically and ethically. Device support assumes a level of competence and

Reviewer 2: NIT: This might read a little better
`A customer assumes that the support agent has a level of understanding and competence, and as such...`

Author: Yep, rereading my original, it was awful. Thanks :)

    have given you permission to do 'whatever it takes' to get the device
    running again, you should still pre-empt your actions by communicating this
    clearly
* During the course of carrying out non-read actions on a device, should the
    customer be required to answer a query before being able to proceed, make it
    clear to them what you have already carried out, and that you need a
    response before continuing. Additionally ensure that any incoming agents
    that may need to access the device have all of your notes and actions up
    to this point, so they can take over in your stead
* *Never* reboot a device without permission, especially in cases where it
    appears that there is a chance that the device will not recover (which may
    be the case in situations where the networking is a non-optimal state). It
    is imperative in these cases that the customer is made aware that this could
    be an outcome in advance, and that they must explicitly give permission for
    a reboot to be carried out

### 3.3 Device Access via a Gateway Device

In the examples, we're able to stay connected to the device when the OpenVPN

> service isn't running purely because we're using a debug image because the SSH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
service isn't running because we're using a development image, and development images allow passwordless root connections via SSH
```

Author: Done.

port allows passwordless root connections. Had we been running a production

> device, then the device would have been in the 'Offline' state, but it would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
image, then the device would have been in the 'Offline' state, but it would
```

Author: Done.

still potentially have had network access and be otherwise running correctly.
This brings up an issue though, how can we connect to a faulty production device
in the field?

The answer comes from the mechanism behind how SSH is tunneled through the VPN,
and we can actually use another device (in the 'Online' state) on the same

> local network as an 'Offline' device to do this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
local network as an 'Offline' device to do this.
```

Author: Done.

> local network as an 'Offline' device to do this

Reviewer 3: maybe we should add some notes on using/checking the "device heart beat" API that @richbayliss deployed in recent months to validate that the device is indeed online (communicating with the api) but the VPN is failing?

Author: @richbayliss What do you think? Do you have a quick one-liner `curl` we could run from the device to see when its last heartbeat was (and what state it denotes the device in)? You could of course just look at the OpenVPN service too, but it'd be nice to have as a 'double confirmation'. :)

> Doing so is pretty simply, you only need the UUIDs of both the gateway

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Doing so is pretty simply, you need the UUIDs of both the gateway
```

Author: Done.

('Online') and target ('Offline') devices, as well as your username and, if
possible, the IP address of the target device (by default, the last seen
'Online' state IP address will be used if the IP is not passed). Once you
have these details, you can carry this out by executing the following on your
host machine:
```
$ ssh -t \
   -o LogLevel=ERROR \
   -p 22 $USERNAME@ssh.balena-devices.com hostvia $UUID_GATEWAY $UUID_TARGET [$IPADDR]
```
Should this not work, it's possible that the IP address has changed (and if it

> has, you *will* need to specify the correct address). The easiest way to find

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has, you *will* need to specify the correct address). The easiest way to find the
```

Author: Done.

potentially correct IP address is to SSH into the gateway device and run the
following script:
```
( prefix=192.168.1; \
    for i in {2..254}; \
    do \
        addr=$prefix.$i; \
        curl -s -m 0.2 $addr:22222 | grep -q "SSH-2.0" && echo $addr BALENA DEVICE || echo $addr; \
     done \
)
```
Ensure you change the `prefix` variable to the correct prefix for the local
network before starting. This script will then go through the range `$prefix.2`
to `$prefix.254`, and flag those devices it believes are potential balena
devices. This should help you narrow down the address range to try connections
to balena devices, substituting the IP address appropriately in the SSH
connection command.

## 4. Component Checklist

The key to any support is context. As a support agent, you should have enough

> context to start an investigation from a customer. If you do not, then you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
context from a customer to start an investigation. If you do not, then you
```

Author: Done.

should ask for as much context and detail about the device as you can before
starting an investigation on the device.

When accessing a device, there are usually some things you can check to see why

> a device may be in a non-normative state. Obviously, this depends on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a device may be in a broken state. Obviously, this depends on the
```

Author: Done.

symptoms a customer has reported, as well as those a support agent may have

> gleaned from running the device diagnostics. However, there are some common

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
found when running the device diagnostics. However, there are some common
```

Author: Done.

> issues that can occur to put a device into a non-normative state that can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
issues that can occur to put a device into a broken state that can be
```

Author: Done.

> quickly rectified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
quickly fixed.
```

Author: Done.

The following sections discuss some of the first components to check when

> carrying out on-device support. Obviously, which components should be checked

Reviewer 2: This is not necessarily obvious 😉 
```suggestion
carrying out on-device support. The components that should be checked
```

Author: True. :D Done.

and in what order comes down to the context of support, and the symptoms seen.

### 4.1 Service Status and Journal Logs

> balenaOS uses [systemd]() as its [init system](), and as such almost all the

Reviewer: missing hyperlinks?

Author: Exercise for the reader....

Done. :)

fundamental components in balenaOS run as systemd services. systemd builds a
dependency graph of all of its unit files (in which services are defined) to

> determine the order in which these should be started/shutdown in. This is

Reviewer 2: Double in is potentially unneeded
```suggestion
determine the order that these should be started or shutdown. This is
```

Author: Done.

generated when systemd is run, although there are ways to rebuild this after
startup and during normal system execution.

Possibly the most important command is `journalctl`, which allows you to read
the service's journal entries. This takes a variety of switches, the most
useful being:

* `--follow`/`-f` - Continues displaying journal entries until the command is halted
    (eg. with Ctrl-C)
* `--unit=<unitFile>`/`-u <unitFile>` - Specifies the unit file to read journal
    entries for. Without this, all units entries are read.
* `--pager-end`/`-e` - Jump straight to the final entries for a unit.
* `--all`/`-a` - Should all entries, even if long or with unprintable
    characters. This is especially useful for displaying the service container
    logs from applications when applied to `balena.service`.

A typical example of using `journalctl` might be following a service to see

> what's occuring; here's it for the Supervisor, following journal entries in

Reviewer 2: https://media.giphy.com/media/fD27koGR4omhG/giphy.gif

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
what's occurring. Here is the output for the Supervisor, following journal entries in
```

Author: Done. :)

Dec 03 15:36:40 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Supervisor API: GET /v1/healthy 200 - 6.900 ms
Dec 03 15:41:41 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Supervisor API: GET /v1/healthy 200 - 7.939 ms
Dec 03 15:46:06 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Attempting container log timestamp flush...
Dec 03 15:46:06 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Container log timestamp flush complete
Dec 03 15:46:42 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Supervisor API: GET /v1/healthy 200 - 15.989 ms
Dec 03 15:51:42 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Supervisor API: GET /v1/healthy 200 - 8.643 ms
Dec 03 15:56:06 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Attempting container log timestamp flush...
Dec 03 15:56:06 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Container log timestamp flush complete
Dec 03 15:56:43 11a12ec resin-supervisor[1184]: Supervisor API: GET /v1/healthy 200 - 7.830 ms
```
Any systemd service can be referenced in the same way, and there are some common
commands that can be used with services:

* `systemctl status <serviceName>` - Will show the status of a service. This
    includes whether it is currently loaded and/or enabled, if it is currently
    active (running) and when it was started, its PID, how much memory it is

>     notionally (and beware here, this isn't always the case) using, the

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to provide some reference to why this is not always the case?

Author: Yeah, I've clarified this to amount of physical memory.

    Dec 03 11:46:13 11a12ec openvpn[1448]: Tue Dec  3 11:46:13 2019 ERROR: Linux route add command failed: external program exited with error status: 2
    Dec 03 11:46:13 11a12ec openvpn[1448]: Tue Dec  3 11:46:13 2019 GID set to openvpn
    Dec 03 11:46:13 11a12ec openvpn[1448]: Tue Dec  3 11:46:13 2019 UID set to openvpn
    Dec 03 11:46:13 11a12ec openvpn[1448]: Tue Dec  3 11:46:13 2019 Initialization Sequence Completed
    ```
* `systemctl start <serviceName>` - Will start a non-running service. Note that
    this will *not* restart a service that is already running.
* `systemctl stop <serviceName>` - Will stop a running service. If the service
    is not running, this command will not do anything.
* `systemctl restart <serviceName>` - Will restart a running service. If the
    service is not running, this will start it.
* `systemctl daemon-reload` - Will essentially run through the startup process
    systemd carries out at initialisation, but without restarting services or
    units. This allows the rebuild of the system dependency graph, and should be
    carried out if any of the unit files are changed whilst the system is
    running.

> This last command may sound a bit confusing, but take a quick example. Imagine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This last command may sound a bit confusing but consider the following example. Imagine
```

Author: Done.

that you need to dynamically change the `resin-supervisor.service` unit file

> for some reason (maybe to increase the healthcheck timeout on a very slow

Reviewer 2: We can be specific because this is an example
```suggestion
to increase the healthcheck timeout on a very slow system.
```

Author: Done.

> system). Once that change has made, you'll want to restart the service. However,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
system). Once that change has been made, you'll want to restart the service. However,
```

Author: Done.

> first, you need to reload the unit file as this is changed from the loaded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
first, you need to reload the unit file as this has changed from the loaded
```

Author: Done.

version. To do this, you'll run `systemctl daemon-reload` and then
`systemctl restart resin-supervisor.service` to restart the Supervisor.

In general, there are some core services that need to execute for a device to
come online, connect to the balenaCloud VPN, download applications and then run
them:

> * `chronyd.service` - Responsible for NTP duties and syncing 'real' network

Reviewer 3: consider also listing `timesyncd` which was used in older versions?

Author: Done.

    time to the device.
* `dnsmasq.service` - The local DNS service which is used for all host OS
    lookups (and is the repeater for application service containers by default).
* `NetworkManager.service` - The underlying Network Manager service, ensuring
    that configured connections are used for networking.
* `os-config.service` - Retrieves settings and configs from the API endpoint,
    including certificates, authorised keys, the VPN config, etc.

> * `openvpn.service` - The VPN service itself, which connects to the balenaCloud

Reviewer 3: consider including the old name as well. I think it used to be called `openvpn-resin.service`. Not super sure when it changed.

Author: Done (v2.10.0).

    VPN, allowing a device to come online (and to be SSHd to and have actions
    performed on it).
* `balena.service` - The balenaEngine service, the modified Docker daemon fork
    that allows the management and running of application service images,
    containers, volumes and networking.
* `resin-supervisor.service` - The balena Supervisor service, responsible for
    the management of applications, including downloading updates for and
    self-healing (via monitoring) of those applications, variables (application/
    device/fleet) and exposure of these services to applications via an
    endpoint.
* `dbus.service` - The DBus daemon socket can be used by applications by
    applying the `io.balena.features.dbus` label, which exposes it in-container.
    This allows applications to control several host OS features, including the

>     Network Manager, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Network Manager.
```

Author: Done.

> Additionally, there are a couple of utility services that, whilst not required

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, there are some utility services that, whilst not required
```

Author: Done.

for a barebones operation, are also useful:
* `ModemManager.service` - Deals with non-Ethernet or Wifi devices, such as
    LTE/GSM modems.
* `avahi-daemon.service` - Used to broadcast the device's local hostname
    (useful in development mode, responds to `balena scan`).

We'll go into several of these services in the following sections, but generally
these are the first points to examine if a system is not behaving as it should,

> as generally most issues will be associated with these services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as most issues will be associated with these services.
```

Author: Done.

Additionally there are a large number of utility services that facilitate the
services above, such as those to mount the correct partitions for data storage,
configuring the Supervisor and running it should it crash, etc.

### 4.2 Persistent Logs

As described in the previous section, the ability to read journals from the
different services that make up balenaOS is vital in helping to track down
issues that arise. However, on reboot these journals will be cleared and so
examining them will not, for example, give any insight as to why the reboot
may have occurred (or which services may have failed causing a reboot).

> To alleviate this, balenaOS allows the enabling of persistent journals (logs)

Reviewer 2: `The enabling ... to be enabled`
```suggestion
To alleviate this, balenaOS allows persistent journals (logs) to be enabled.
```

Author: Done.

to be enabled by customers. The easiest way to achieve this is to go the the
Dashboard URL for the application or device in question, select

> 'Fleet Configuration' or 'Device Configuration' respectively, and then toggle

Reviewer 2: I believe on a fresh setup the action will be to "activate" the setting
![Annotation 2020-01-20 162401](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15064535/72742270-4a448780-3ba1-11ea-938f-43c2421d8ba0.jpg)
Once "activated" you will then see a toggle showing "enabled" and "disabled" options

Author: Changed wording.

'Enable persistent logging.'. If toggled on an application, all devices
associated with that application will have persistent journals enabled, else
it will be enabled only for the device selected. Because the enabling/disabling
of persistent journals affects where they are stored, the device will reboot
once selected to ensure that the settings are applied.

Once persistent journals are enabled, they end up stored as part of the state
partition on the device (either on SD card, eMMC, harddisk, etc.). This is

> located on-device at `/var/log/journal/<uuid>` where the UUID is variable.

Reviewer 2: Is this UUID based on anything or is unique to the persistent logging feature?

Author: Unique to when the logs are first generated, there's not really anything useful to add here.

Jan 13 11:05:07 dee2945 dnsmasq[763]: dnsmasq[763]: using nameserver 8.8.8.8#53
Jan 13 11:05:07 dee2945 dnsmasq[763]: dnsmasq[763]: read /etc/hosts - 6 addresses
Jan 13 11:05:07 dee2945 dnsmasq[763]: dnsmasq[763]: using nameserver 8.8.8.8#53
Jan 13 11:05:07 dee2945 kernel: i2c /dev entries driver
Jan 13 11:05:07 dee2945 kernel[664]: [   14.974497] i2c /dev entries driver
...
```
The rest of the journal has been truncated for brevity. Note that the `-a`
(short for `--all`) has been used, so that the logs from the service containers
themselves are also visible. Without this switch, the service container output
from `balena.service` (the balenaEngine) would be output like this:
```
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 69dc1cee03e4[765]: [1B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 69dc1cee03e4[765]: [36B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 69dc1cee03e4[765]: [16B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 69dc1cee03e4[765]: [1B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 e374bbb9ddd4[765]: [1B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 e374bbb9ddd4[765]: [35B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 e374bbb9ddd4[765]: [16B blob data]
Jan 13 11:05:20 dee2945 e374bbb9ddd4[765]: [1B blob data]
```

> This obviously is not a problem if you're not looking for issues in the

Reviewer 2: Double negative feels clunky here, how about something like:
"This is not a problem if you are looking for issues outside of the application's services, but..."

Author: Changed wording.

application's services, but usually enabling persistent logs allows us to
examine what also might be happening in a service container that could cause
an issue (for example, maybe the container is privileged and causing a reboot
because it talks to the host DBus and issues a restart).

> The total space for persistent journals is currently 8MB (the total for the

Reviewer 3: In OS 2.46 it has been bumped up to 32MB and moved data partition I believe.

Reviewer 6: I just happened to be updating the docs for this and it was 2.45 (and yes to state->data partition) per https://github.com/balena-os/meta-balena/blob/development/CHANGELOG.md#v2450

Author: Thanks both. Done. :)

> state partition is currently 20MB). This obviously has some impact on what can

Reviewer 2: What's obvious to you might not be obvious to the reader
```suggestion
state partition is currently 20MB). This has some impact on what can
```

Author: Done.

be captured, and if an application is quite verbose, this can mean that there
isn't enough space to store logs that might be useful. It's worth noting this,
and informing customers of this fact so they can cut down the logging output
if persistent logs are deemed important for issue finding.

> ## 5. Determining Networking Issues

Reviewer: Something I'm working on atm: https://github.com/balena-io/device-diagnostics/issues/129

Author: \o/

There are some common networking issues that can stop several major components
(the VPN, Supervisor, balenaEngine) from working correctly.

The current list of core networking requirements are
[here](https://www.balena.io/docs/reference/OS/network/2.x/#network-requirements)
and in brief, include:
* Access to TCP port 443 (for VPN, API, etc.), and UDP ports 123 and 53 for
    NTP and DNS respectively.
* Access to the `*.balena-cloud.com`, `*.docker.com` and `*.docker.io`
    wildcarded domains.
* Access to the `*.resinio.pool.ntp.org` NTP pools.
* Access to 8.8.8.8 and 8.8.4.4 for DNS resolution (although this is
    configurable via the `dnsServers` setting in `config.json`).

Additionally, customer applications themselves may have networking requirements

> which may not be met. For example, a customer server may be required by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which may not be met. For example, a customer's application may need to send data to a server, but the server is offline and unreachable...
```

Author: Done.

application to send data to, but may be offline or unreachable, and maybe the
application isn't designed to handle these failures. We'll go into customer
application debugging later.

In general, debugging networking symptoms also gets easier the more you
experiment with making changes to networking interfaces and routes on a device.

> As such, it is well worth taking the balena Networking Masterclass to

Reviewer 2: A link to the Networking Masterclass here would be 👌

Author: Done.

familiarise yourself with balena device networking.

The following bullet points describe some of the more common network failure

> modes, as well as how to potentially go about tracking them down. Be aware that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
modes, as well as how to track them down. Be aware that
```

Author: Done.

> several of these problems may also intermix. For example, NTP failure could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
several of these problems may also occur at the same time, with one problem causing others to appear. For example, NTP failure could
```

Author: Done.

stop the date from being correct, which can lead to the VPN failing to connect
(as the certificate is probably not yet date-valid) as well as the Supervisor
failing to download updates (for the same reason).

### 5.1 NTP Failure

Service: `chronyd.service`
CLI: `chronyc`

Network Time Protocol is important because it allows devices without RTCs
(Real-Time Clocks) to retrieve the correct date and time from Internet based
servers that run on an extremely fine granularity. At first glance, this may
not seem significant, but devices such as the Rapsberry Pi do not include an

> RTC and so when balenaOS is first booted, it sets the time to that when the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RTC and so when balenaOS is first booted, it sets the time when the
```

Author: Done.

release of the OS was built. Clearly, this could be days, weeks, months or
even years behind the current time. Because almost all the balena services
that work with applications work with balenaCloud endpoints, it is extremely
important that the date and time be set correctly, else SSL-based connections
(including HTTPS connections) will be rejected because the certificates
presented will appear to be date invalid when compared to the system clock.

Depending on how skewed the device date is from the real date, this can manifest
as several different issues:
* Refusal to connect to the balenaCloud VPN
* Refusal to download configuration from the API
* Refusal by the Supervisor to download the latest application updates

Examining the status of the `chrony` service can show these symptoms, along
with the simple `date` command:
```
root@11a12ec:/# date
Tue Dec  3 17:27:33 UTC 2019
```
If the date reported by the device differs to the current date and time, then
there is most probably a problem with the time service.

> Reboot your device, or power down/power up and wait for it to come online before

Reviewer 2: This could do with some setup, how about...
```suggestion
Before continuing with this exercise, reboot your device, or power down/power up and wait for it to come online before
```

Author: Done.

SSHing into it.

For this example, we're not going to use `balena ssh` for
accessing the device as we'll be doing things to the system that include making
it drop off the VPN (and at this point our shell would be terminated). Instead,
we'll use `ssh` from your command line. Ensure you know the local IP
address of the debug device (or use `balena scan` to find the hostname of your

> device), and SSH into it like this (where `192.168.1.173` is the IP address of

Reviewer 2: The phrase "like this" is ambiguous, I would expect to immediately see an example. I think that this might refer to the `balena ssh` command just below, but I think the `Note...` gets in the way - perhaps the note could appear after the example command?

Author: I've rewritten this as the CLI uses the local IP to SSH into rather than the tunnel.

(`Mar 23 12:00:08 f34c2e9 openvpn[786]: Thu Mar 23 12:00:08 2017 SIGTERM[hard,] received, process exiting`)
and then it starting up again. But whilst it initialises, you'll note that
whilst trying to connect it found a problem in the verification stage:
```
Mar 23 12:00:09 f34c2e9 openvpn[2787]: Thu Mar 23 12:00:09 2017 VERIFY OK: depth=1, C=AU, ST=Some-State, O=Internet Widgits Pty Ltd
Mar 23 12:00:09 f34c2e9 openvpn[2787]: Thu Mar 23 12:00:09 2017 VERIFY ERROR: depth=0, error=certificate is not yet valid: CN=vpn.balena-cloud.com
Mar 23 12:00:09 f34c2e9 openvpn[2787]: Thu Mar 23 12:00:09 2017 OpenSSL: error:1416F086:SSL routines:tls_process_server_certificate:certificate verify failed
```
The certificate that it fetched from the balenaCloud VPN service is not yet
valid. This is because SSL certificates have "valid from" and "valid to"
dates. These ensure that they can only be used in a particular time window, and
if the current time falls outside of that window then any connection using them
is invalid. In this case, because we've set the time back to 2017, the date
doesn't fall within that window and the connection is aborted by the client.

> However, after reading the above, if you now look at the Dashboard, you'll now

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, after reading the above, if you look at the Dashboard, you'll now
```

Author: Done.

Mar 23 12:02:30 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [error]   Failed to get target state for device: Error: certificate is not yet valid
Mar 23 12:03:30 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [event]   Event: Update notification {}
Mar 23 12:03:30 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [api]     POST /v1/update 204 - 26.804 ms
Mar 23 12:03:31 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [error]   Failed to get target state for device: Error: certificate is not yet valid
Mar 23 12:04:23 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [debug]   Attempting container log timestamp flush...
Mar 23 12:04:23 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [debug]   Container log timestamp flush complete
Mar 23 12:04:26 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [api]     GET /v1/healthy 200 - 10.975 ms
Mar 23 12:04:31 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [error]   Failed to get target state for device: Error: certificate is not yet valid
```
As you can see, the certificate is again not valid as the current device time
does not fall within the validity window, and so the Supervisor won't pull the
updated application. If we restart chrony, this will be rectified and the

> Supervisor will, after a short delay untill its next poll, update the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Supervisor will, after a short delay, update the
```

Author: Done.

Nov 22 11:59:50 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [info]    Internet Connectivity: OK
Nov 22 12:02:17 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [info]    Applying target state
Nov 22 12:02:18 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [debug]   Replacing container for service frontend because of config changes:
Nov 22 12:02:18 f34c2e9 resin-supervisor[1830]: [debug]     Non-array fields:  {"added":{},"deleted":{"command":{},"entrypoint":{},"environment":{},"labels":{}},"updated":{"image":"registry2.balena-cloud.com/v2/83732ad30648d5f3e68188ed154ffdc2@sha256:8ec0ba1f96a51d936a83d8aa0ac1db2827a0458c2b6f7e3a5f814d6ad26b6d1f","workingDir":""}}
...
```
This shows the importance of a working service such as timesetting, and how this
can affect the system as a whole. As a note, be aware that not *every* device
relies completely on NTP. Some devices, such as an Intel NUC, also have battery
backed services including an RTC, which means that even if NTP is not working
the time may look at first glance as though it's correct. However, if NTP is
not operational even an RTC will eventually suffer from clock skew (the slow
movement away from the real time due to drift) which will eventually cause

> issues.

Reviewer 3: Is it worth mentioning the HTTP method of updating the clock in the case that the NTP is block and one needs to get the device to a nominal state?

Reviewer 3: One day @ZubairLK will build htpdate into the hostOS :)

`chronyc` is a command-line utility that can be used to interoperate with the

> NTP daemon. There are a great number of commands at hand, but possibly a few of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NTP daemon. `chronyc` has many commands, the most useful are:
```

Author: Done.

the most useful are:
* `sources` - A list of all the current NTP sources being used by the NTP daemon
* `reselect` - Forces the NTP daemon to reselect the best time synchronisation
    source
* `tracking` - Information about the system clock itself, including skew

> * `ntpdata` - Detailed information on tall the current NTP sources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `ntpdata` - Detailed information on all the current NTP sources
```

Author: Done.

### 5.2 DNS Issues

Service: `dnsmasq.service`

DNS (Domain Name Service) functionality allows the IP address of a hostname to
be retrieved for use by anything that uses endpoints on the Internet (that
isn't specified by an IP address). Any executable that uses a hostname to
make a connection to that host always uses DNS to get the IP address to make
that connection.

> For this reason, DNS is vital in the reliable operation of a balena device is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason, DNS is vital in the reliable operation of a balena device as it
```

Author: Done.

provides the ability to lookup `*.balena-cloud.com` hostnames to allow the
download of applications, reporting the device state, connection to the VPN,
etc.

DNS is provided by the `dnsmasq.service` unit, which uses a default
configuration located at `/etc/dnsmasq.service` and a list of nameservices
in `/etc/resolv.dnsmasq`. This itself is derived from the
`/var/run/resolv/interface/NetworkManager` file.

The DNSMasq service runs at local address `127.0.0.2`. This is used, because
it allows customer application services to provide their own DNS if required
and therefore does not clash with them.

By default, the external name servers used are the Google primary and secondary
at `8.8.8.8` and  `8.8.4.4`. However, these can be overridden by modifying the
`/mnt/boot/config.json` file and adding a `dnsServers` property, with a comma
separated list of the IP addresses of the nameservers to use (see
[the docs](https://github.com/balena-os/meta-balena#dnsservers) for more
information).

> In this example, we're not going to use `balena ssh` for

Reviewer 2: This block is repeated from the section on NTP, perhaps we could just refer back to that here?

Author: Removed, `balena ssh` is fine.

your device, or `<host>.local` name):
```
$ ssh -p 22222 root@192.168.1.173
The authenticity of host '[192.168.1.173]:22222 ([192.168.1.173]:22222)' can't be established.
ECDSA key fingerprint is SHA256:xr1DjpoK8Ga6J318INrxP7bQbtALX8+//QlzoASbgWY.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)? yes
Warning: Permanently added '[192.168.1.173]:22222' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
root@f34c2e9:~#
```

We're going to modify the DNS servers to point at one that doesn't exist,
just to show what happens. SSH into your device as above, then run the
following:
```
root@51cc514:~# jq '.dnsServers = "1.2.3.4"' /mnt/boot/config.json > /mnt/data/config.json && mv /mnt/data/config.json /mnt/boot/config.json
root@51cc514:~# mount -o remount,rw /
root@51cc514:~# mv /etc/resolv.dnsmasq /etc/resolv.dnsmasq.moved
root@51cc514:~# sync
root@51cc514:~# reboot
```
This will move the default DNSMasq resolver config file, so that it's not
picked up. Additionally, it will modify the configuration to set the nameserver
to use as `1.2.3.4`. As this isn't a valid nameserver, nothing will get the
right address to make connections. Note that usually, remounting the root FS

> as writable is a very risky move, and should not be carried out without good

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as writeable is a very risky move, and should not be carried out without good
```

Author: Done.

reason!

After a while, once the device has rebooted, SSH back into the device, and look
at the `dnsmasq.service` unit:
```
root@51cc514:~# systemctl status dnsmasq
Warning: The unit file, source configuration file or drop-ins of dnsmasq.service changed on disk. Run 'systemctl daemon-reload' to reload units.
● dnsmasq.service - DNS forwarder and DHCP server
   Loaded: loaded (/lib/systemd/system/dnsmasq.service; enabled; vendor preset: enabled)
  Drop-In: /etc/systemd/system/dnsmasq.service.d
           └─dnsmasq.conf

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Write the new OpenVPN configuration to the state partition.
```

Author: I think the review's messed up here, else I'm not sure what the issue is.

Reviewer: nothing major, just pointing out you can use markdown rendering to simplify numbered lists to:

```
1. Stop the Supervisor.
1. Write the new OpenVPN configuration to the state partition.
```

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Write the correct root CA for the VPN to the state partition.
```

Author: Ditto.

Reviewer: same as above, feel free to ignore!

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
networking environment as listed in [5. Determining Networking Issues](#5-detemining-networking-issues).
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Balena devices are able to accommodate this if it is known a DPI network is in
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application. On the other hand, if we look at `/mnt/boot/config.json` you can see that all the required information for the device to be associated
with its application exists.:
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is difficult to read, so you should familiarize yourself with `jq` to parse
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restart the Supervisor, simply restart the `systemd` service:
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documentation before carrying out any sort of update, but in essence
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issues with balenaEngine themselves are rare, although it can be initially
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a new, container-only writeable file!
```

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
root@5c36f880c4b3:/usr/src/app# echo 'This is a new, container-only writeable file!' > /mynewfile.txt
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shell, and create a new file. This will create a new writeable layer for the
```

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a new, container-only writeable file!
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
container restarts) and writeable layers that are used only for that container
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
here of creating a writeable layer in a container and finding it in the
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
balenaEngine stores all its writeable data in the `/var/lib/docker` directory,
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, when is absolutely necessary? There are some issues which occasionally
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should only be stopped/restarted if absolutely necessary.
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
behavior to not work correctly. In these cases, a prune should help clean
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this masterclass, you've learned how to deal with balena devices as a
```

Author: Done. :(

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run diagnostics checks and understand their results.
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: I would add a note on how to check the registry is not blocked. I have had this a couple of times recently, where I had to test pull the user image to validate that it was blocked, since curl to the registry seemed to work correctly (maybe not curl-ing on the right port?)

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
select) network packets have their headers and payload inspected to
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ensure there is nothing contained which should not be allowed in/out of the
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: wont this change be set back because I think the API doesn't allow poll intervals of below 10 min anymore?

Author: Done. I've changed this to altering the hostname.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: I think a portion of this sentence is missing. I assume it means to say something like: "if for some reason the images also need to be removed, run.."

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: I guess this line will leave external readers intrigued about the knowledge base (which is fine once we make it public.)

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: mention that this is common on the RPI family of devices and that the "checks" will surface if this is a problem.

Author: Unfortunately the review's messed up here (and for several above, though I could guess what those were related to). I'm failing in the context here. :(

Reviewer 3: @hedss I believe this comment is related to the undervoltage that we see in some support issues. As far as I know only the pi family has this capability.

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: Do we have a good way to know if a device should be expected or not. I guess for linux newbies they don't really know what to look for.

Author: Again, I have no idea what bit of the document this relates to.

Reviewer 3: This comment was related to this line:
>Device detection problems, where devices that are expected to show in the device node list are either incorrectly detected or misdetected

Author: Right, we don't have a good idea of what to check for here. I think this should also come under the udev/hardware MC, which will give people a better idea, and then we could link to that here in the future.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 3: there is also the case were users are logging/writting into their containers but not into volumes, so the actual container writeable layer baloons. This can be checked using `balena system df` and compared to the balena image sizes.

Author: Again, I think this is the space section, but need some context. :(

Reviewer 3: Yeah this was just a general comment that we may want to talk about how users also write into their containers rather than volumes ( as in this section https://github.com/balena-io/debugging-masterclass/blob/e5292ab3bfb6fa51ed17299960ff422fb05bc35d/README.md#1112-customer-data ) as i have seen this a fair few times and users containers bloat massively because the write logs into the writteable layer

Author: Written an appropriate section.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Device connections to balenaCloud vary depending on the operation being
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    (both development and production) in a couple of ways. The first is adding
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another stumbling block is that if there are VPN issues then this usually means
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If every balena device on the network is failing to connect to the
```

Author: Done.

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and that no traffic is able to make its way out of (or into) the network.
```

>    Active: active (running) since Wed 2019-12-04 17:46:5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
network. This raises several issues of their own. Whilst 'clear'
```

Author: Done.
